Testing, 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
This is September the 8th, I believe,
at 8502 Amethyst Court. And I have the joy and honor
of chatting with Dr. Roger Feldman about his
memories of being a Texas A&M for a number of years.
Roger, to introduce yourself to someone who might
hear this tape or read the transcription,
describe where you grew up, what family did, where
you went to high school and college, experience
before coming to A&M. Well, I was born before the
Depression in 1925 on a farm in southeastern Iowa
is located about 18 miles basically south of the
town of Iowa City, Iowa where the University of
Iowa is located. My one great grandfather had
settled in that area in 1838 and this was my would
have been my father's grandfather on his mother's
side and then my Dad's grandparents on his
father's side settled there in the mid-1850s. And
they began farming. And then my grandfather
followed his dad on the farm. And then my dad and my
uncle took over farming the same territory just
after the end of World War II, or World War I. I went
to a rural school that had nine grades in one room
with one teacher. The biggest class year we ever
had as far as students in school was 33, but I was in a
big class because I had six in my class all the way
through from kindergarten through to the time I
graduated from eighth grade. Then I went to high
school in the small town of Kelowna, Iowa, which is
in the same vicinity. At that time, it was really a
very small community of only about 700 people.
Being now only some 18 miles from Iowa City, it's a
little bit of a bedroom community and has grown
considerably to where it's now a town of about
3,000 people and a very, very active place. And
it's centered in the Amish Mennonite part of
eastern Iowa. And the Amish and the Mennonites
have both become very, very commercially minded.
Tourism is a major activity, in fact, When Chuck
McCandless was vice president and provost at Iowa
State University, one of the tones that his wife
had on her circle of tours for visiting
dignitaries was that she would go from Ames to
Pella to the Dutch community, then to Kelowna to
the Amish Mennonite community, and then to the
Amanda colonies west of Iowa City, which is a
German colony that was established in the late
1800s. And that was her circle of visitation for
tourists in Iowa, and it has become very much that
way. In fact, Kelowna now has become a major quilt
center in the country. They have a quilt museum,
and it's a very, very active and busy community and
has prospered greatly, but still essentially an
agricultural community. Went into the service in
the summer of 1943 and got a medical discharge in
December of 44. Then went to Iowa State in the fall
of 1945, took one year of pre-veterinary medicine
and graduated with a degree in veterinary
medicine in June of 1950. And I spent the first
seven years in the 50s in three different large
animal practices, never really feeling
comfortable in any of them. And as a hiatus, took a
job with federal food inspection in the late
summer of 1957. And one of the most fortunate
incidents in my entire life happened in the spring
of 1962. I got the opportunity to apply to go to
graduate school at one of five schools that the
Meat Inspection Service was working with at that
time. Unfortunately, I got assigned to go to
Auburn University and work on a master's degree
and teach at the same time. I had grown up wanting to
be a teacher and had been discouraged from
teaching by both my high school superintendent,
my high school coach, and others as well. because
of the low salaries of teaching in those years. And
when I got to Auburn, I found out that I had really
been a teacher at heart all my life, and it hadn't
changed any. Then at the conclusion of my master's
degree program, I was reassigned to Fort Worth in
the federal inspection station there, and was
there for about eight months, and realized that I
had to get back to school one way or another. A
Friday evening, the last Friday in May in 1965, I
called a friend of mine who had once been on the
faculty here and was now at the federal station at
Iowa State if he knew of any places that I could
apply for a teaching position. And he said, well, I
know that two people left the Department of
Pathology at Texas A&M today. And he said, I'm sure
that Dr. Bridges doesn't have replacements for
them as yet. So on Monday, which was Memorial Day
and was a federal holiday, my wife and my two
younger children and I drove to College Station,
had never been south of Corsicana in the state of
Texas before in my life, and walked into Charles
Bridges' office and told him I was looking for
work. That was the last Monday in May of 1965.
And 10 days after I was down here, I got a letter from
him offering me a position beginning the 1st of
July as an assistant professor in pathology. I
took it. I moved here the last two days of June. And
I'm still here.
I gather that the search process consisted of Dr.
Bridges. Essentially, because the man that I had
worked for, I taught for, he wasn't in my master's
program, but he was the man I taught for at Auburn,
had earned a master's degree here, and Bridges
knew him real well. So you think they chatted? Yes.
Because when I left Auburn, Jim Neal told me, he
said, you'll be back in school before you know it.
Let's start by your describing Dr. Bridges, your
impressions of him at first and then later. I wish
in the late 60s and the early 70s that he and I could
have gotten on the same page a little better. He
didn't understand me, and I didn't understand
him. I guess Ken Pierce summed it up the best. This
was after Bridges had stepped down as department
head. He said, you're different than most of us out
here because, he said, you are a total university
person. And this had to do with the things I was
doing in the university as far as graduation was
concerned, PA work in athletics, the Memorial
Student Center, and many other things. And I was
deeply involved in campus activities. I spoke at
Muster every year. And these were things that no
one at the College of Veterinary Medicine
participated in other than me. Now, in the
department, he operated as the department head,
not the chair. Right. Meaning he ran things. Yes.
Of course, now this was a carryover from the early
days of professional veterinary medicine in the
academic world, where there was a very small
faculty. Most departments had no more than two or
three, maybe four people in it. And it was left to
the department head to do all of the mundane work.
And the other people did the teaching. It was that
way at Auburn, and it was that way here, and it was
that way at Iowa State when I was in school there. In
the Department of Pathology at Iowa State, when I
was a student, there were two people. No, three
people. There were three people in pathology,
three people in microbiology, and that's all. I
mean, they did it all. When you came here, when you
joined the faculty, how many were in the
department and who were they? Do you remember?
Let's see. There were non-students. There was
Charles Bridges, Ken Pierce, and I guess his given
name is Michael Robinson. We called him Mick, but
he was in the department. And everybody else in
there were graduate students. Gary Adams, who is
now the associate dean for research, Kay Reed, and
Ernest Stare were all graduate students in the
department. So there were just the three of them,
because there had been five, and then the two left.
And so there was still another opening after I
came. Describe the physical
and facilities of vet school in the UK. What was it?
The veterinary school in the summer of 1965
consisted of two structures. The one was the
academic building, which was the first structure
built out there and sat by itself. And the other was
the clinic building, which housed the small and
large animal clinic and the abattoir. And they
were separated by a space of probably 30, 40 feet,
maybe 50 feet. But they were separate entities.
You had to go outdoors to go from one building to the
other. Then it's either in the summer of 67 or 68
they got the grant to tie the two buildings
together and enlarge the clinic. And they did
that. And then we since then have undergone at
least three more expansions. And the department
was located where at that time? On the second floor
of a three-story building. The anatomy was on the
first floor, and the dean's office was on the first
floor. Microbiology and pathology were on the
second floor, and physiology and parasitology
were on the third floor. And were you given an
office or a lab? I shared an office with Ernest
Stare. What's his name? Ernest Stair. S-T-E-H-R?
No, S-T-A-I-R. He was an Oklahoma State graduate,
was here working on a PhD, which he completed in the
late 60s. I don't know whether it was 68 or 69. And
then he went to Nebraska, and then he subsequently
ended up back at Oklahoma State where he had
originally graduated. And this will be the only
dollar question I'll ask. Your beginning salary
was? 11,000. For 12 months? For 12 months.
Describe your initial responsibilities. What
was your work assignment? I essentially was in
charge of post-mortem for the senior students.
What did that mean? Well, that means the
dissection and examination of all the deceased
animals and reporting them back to the clinician
and trying to arrive at a final, if they didn't have
a diagnosis on the animal, try to provide one. Most
of these were the fourth-year students? Well, at
that time, it was only a three-year program, so
they were the third-year students. These were all
three-year students? Yeah, but they were all
graduating seniors. Describe some of your
learning experiences since you were a new
teacher, some of your learning experiences in the
early years with that task. Well, of course, I'd
had a little exposure to this from my work with
Federal Meat Inspection in slaughter of hogs and
cattle. The old saying, you can't tell by the looks
of a grasshopper how far it can jump. You also
cannot tell from the outside of an animal what they
look like inside. It was such a shock at times in the
slaughterhouses to have seen animals walking
around in the pens before they were slaughtered
that looked to be perfectly healthy and good for
food consumption, and then to get them on a killing
floor and get them opened up and find out that they
were just riddled with chronic and sometimes
acute disease processes. And the same is true
with... the deceased in the veterinary school
here. In fact, I created a program that I gave to
practitioners groups during, oh, this would have
been in the mid-70s. which was essentially, gee,
look what I found, things that just absolutely
were totally unexpected in the animal that you
were examining, things that you just had no idea
from the clinical reports and the clinical
behavior that this situation existed. And of
course, with animals having such poor
communicative abilities, if they don't really
show you what's going on, it's very hard to tell.
And it was really fascinating at times to see these
animals that appeared to be doing quite well and
then see what tremendous amounts of pathology
they could have still within them and be still
carrying on a fairly decent life until they would
get just to that brink of when finally they fall
over the edge and then they just go down like they
fell off a cliff. Describe some of the student
responses to this experience, both the serious
and the lighter? Well, I suppose one of my most
humorous incidents was that he always tried to be
somewhat of a comedian at times. And Arden Kimler,
who was in the anatomy department, used to have me
do the section of a horse. for the anatomy
students. It would demonstrate both some of the
warm anatomy of an animal, as well as the technique
of dissecting them. There was a fairly good sized
crowd of students there that day. Probably, I
don't think the whole class was, probably maybe 30
or so of them were there. And they were in three or
four rows. And I'm working away and talking at the
same time. And I said, now, those of you who are up
here close, if you watch close, you'll notice that
at no time while I'm doing this do my fingers ever
leave my hands. And I heard some guy in the back say,
what did he say?
They were writing down things so fast. Because
Kemmler was a little tricky at times. And they were
taking notes as fast as they could. And this kid
didn't want to miss that. Did anybody ever
almost faint or appear shocked? No. By the time a
veterinary student, and I presume this is true
with medical students, by the time they get
through with freshman anatomy, they've inhaled
so much formaldehyde that they don't really get
shocked by anything. They're conditioned to the
process. As you are beginning as a faculty member
here, Did anyone ever offer you any guidance,
advice, any kind of rules or suggestions?
Surprisingly so, very little if any. And I
suppose, because I had taught at Auburn, I was
considered to be an experienced teacher. I'd be my
guest. But I got very, very little, if any,
guidelines in classroom decorum or anything
else. It was pretty much left up to me. What did a
veterinary faculty member wear to work in those
days?
Well, in a classroom, we all wore ties and shirts.
In fact, when I retired in 1990,
I can look back and say that this includes my time at
Auburn and the time here. I never met a class other
than in a working lab, in a post-mortem lab,
without a tie. I just always did. In fact, a rather
humorous incident with that. At Auburn, I was
taking graduate work. And I was in a class in German
up on the campus. And I thought this might help me in
passing the German requirement for a doctorate
later on. So I took a year of German. And one morning
in class, the instructor was asking us questions
in German. And we were answering him back in
German. I was the only one in the class who was
teaching, and I had on a shirt and tie. And he asked
me in German what I had around my neck. And I very
quickly answered, four children in German. And he
about went under the desk. The other students
couldn't understand why he was laughing so hard,
because they didn't understand what meant, but he
did.
as you are getting settled in, who became your
closest faculty or staff associates? Who'd you
turn to, who were your best friends in those
earliest years?
Probably J.D. McCready. I had a better
relationship with J.D. McCready than I did with
Bridges. Describe him. Describe Dr. McCready.
Make believe I don't know him. Well, I don't know
whether I can or not. J.D. McCready was a most
unusual individual. He was a tall man, very quiet,
very unassuming, but he had a way of getting his own
way in this very, whatever manner, whatever it
took, he got it. But he was also somebody that I
could talk to, and I did. There was also a fellow in
the department named Don Clark, whom in later
years I became very close to. I used to visit with
him a great deal. And then a former student named
James Anderson, who then spent the rest of his
career in the Department of Physiology, and I were
good friends, and I talked with him a lot. The
people in the pathology department were so
isolated, it was kind of strange, and they still
are. They still are. Everybody had their own
thing, and they pursued it, and they didn't
interact with each other very much. You're saying
that the individuals isolated themselves. Yes,
yes. And the physiology department was a lot more
collective group. And McCready used his people a
lot more group-wise. He passed the
responsibilities around and the teaching
assignments around a lot more so than the other
departments did. But then eventually he had more
people. And he taught more courses. Did you ever go
to him for advice on any important matters that you
recall? What do I do about this or that? Yes. And one
of them really created a strong barrier between
Charles Bridges and I until 1976, when I finally
confronted him with it one day, and things changed
from that point on. When tenure was started at
Texas A&M, I was in the latter stages of my PhD
program. I had four children, and I wasn't going to
get finished with the PhD by the time the seven
years for tenure was up. And I
went up to McCready and said, J.D., I don't know
what to do. I said, I can't get finished in time.
There's no way that I can get finished in time. He
said, I don't have a PhD in my whole department. And
I don't have one. I'm never going to have one. He
said, take the tenure. And so I did. And learned
later on that that really infuriated Bridges. He
couldn't do anything about it. He had to grant me
tenure, but it really infuriated him. And things
rode along, and we just kind of ignored each other.
And in the summer of 76, there was an international
food conference at Iowa State. And there was an
alumni gathering simultaneously with it at Iowa
State that I wanted to go to. So I put in a request. to
Dr. Brady's to get, I think, it was either a day's
vacation, I guess it was, to attend that without
any cost to the department. And I got a real terse
turn down from him. So I sat down and I wrote him
about a four-page handwritten letter. Didn't
take it to the secretary to type it. Wrote it to him
and put it in an envelope and sealed it and took it up
to the department secretary and told her to give it
to him. And about 30 minutes later, he came back to
my office and sat down in a chair and we talked. And
from that point on, he and I have been good friends.
And then two months later, I ended up having a third
of my right lung removed. And I found out from
someone else that he was really concerned, that he
really was deeply concerned about my welfare. But
I still have the greatest respect for him because
he was the one that let me come here. And so if it
hadn't been for his trust in me, I wouldn't be where
I am. And I respect him for it. And I respect him for
the feelings he had. We're just different. I mean,
I'm different than other people in my feelings
towards the university. And so it's
understandable. People don't understand why I
did commencements for as long as I did or how I did
them. But I enjoyed it. And it was something that I
found that I was doing that was useful. And the
people for whom it was being done were satisfied
with it, and so I kept on doing it. Because we're
going to get to those in a minute. Let's stay with
the vet school for a second. Who was, make believe I
didn't know who the dean was in those years.
Identify him and describe him and his
characteristics. Because the first, what, 10
years, 11 years, was Alvin Price.
I never got to know Dr. Price all that well when he
was dean. I knew him a lot better after he was
dean.
That's it.
Thank
you.
But
it really didn't get to be that bad. It's just that
particularly then after getting
some domestic problem.
This is what, of course, that's inevitable. But it
was along
in the 70s, which was an aftermath of, not an
aftermath of this, but the problem with the
isolation of the school to work is we had a real high
divorce rate amongst married students. One of the
major problems with it was that when Friday night
came, as I said many times, that we were very
fortunate that our students only drank once a week
from Friday night until Saturday night.
They
just didn't have any social activities at all.
seriously taught out there, but it didn't seem to
be as much of a problem. And we still have a lot of
marriages, inter-class marriages. After
they left school, which was somewhat of a surprise
to me, and not either. It's kind of like I told a
couple of them one time, one of the problems with if
they had wives that worked on the campus, that
their wife worked in or
things you've got to remember. You're
going to be veterinarians
when you're You're not. You're competitors in a
variety of ways, and you're different.